{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1040{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}{\f2\fnil Apercu Mono Pro;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.18362}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f0\fs22\lang16 1.  SOUL\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://hyperallergic.com/560054/2011-egyptian-revolution/ }}{\fldrslt{https://hyperallergic.com/560054/2011-egyptian-revolution/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line A Digital Archive of the 2011 Egyptian Revolution, From Graffiti to Music\b0\line by HAKIM BISHARA May 6, 2020\line Hakim Bishara is a staff writer for Hyperallergic and co-director of the artist-run gallery Soloway in Brooklyn, New York. He is a recipient of the 2020 Andy Warhol Foundation | Creative Capital Arts Writers Grant.\line\line\line The rich online resource, spearheaded by researcher Nicola Pratt, reveals how culture was \ldblquote an outlet\rdblquote  for political views during the revolution and its aftermath.\line February 11 in 2011 was a day that Egyptians waited decades to see. After less than a month of widespread popular protests, the country\rquote s ruler of 30 years, Hosni Mubarak, stepped down. The Arab Spring was well on its way, heralding a new era of democratic revolutions in the region. But that sense of euphoria didn\rquote t last for long and the struggle for freedom has since devolved into chaos and wars.\par
At the University of Warwick in the United Kingdom, researcher Nicola Pratt spearheaded a project to archive the Egyptian revolution of 2011 through the prism of art and popular culture. \ldblquote Politics, Popular Culture and the 2011 Egyptian Revolution\rdblquote  is a free online resource than spans more than 200 items of visual art, performance, photography, graffiti, music, TV, and film made during the uprising and its aftermath.\par
\ldblquote Music, graffiti, satire and film all played a vital role in giving Egyptians an outlet for their political views during the 2011 revolution and its aftermath, but by their very nature these things can be ephemeral,\rdblquote  Pratt, who teaches International Politics of the Middle East at the Warwick\rquote s Department of Politics & International Studies, said in a statement. \ldblquote Our archive captures a snapshot of these popular responses to the Revolution and, we hope, not only will preserve them as valuable records for future researchers in the face of official attempts to impose a historical narrative, but also to spark the interest of new students of history and politics.\rdblquote\line Pratt compiled the archive with the help of Dalia Mostafa, a lecturer in Arabic and Comparative Literature at the University of Manchester; Dina Rezk, a lecturer in Middle Eastern History at the University of Reading; and Sara Salem, previously a research and teaching fellow in Middle East Politics at Warwick and now a lecturer in sociology at the London School of Economics.\par
Users can browse the archive by theme, media type, or timeline of the revolution. It also includes study guides for independent learners and teachers.\par
One of the archived works of performance is artist Laila Soliman\rquote s 2011 \ldblquote No Time for Art (A Salute to the Martyrs and the Living),\rdblquote  which commemorates the stories of victims of police brutality during the protests through a theatrical performance. The archive also features a collection of political cartoons and works of graffiti, which were some of the more common expressions of resistance during the revolution.\line In addition, the online archive is rife with images from Tahrir Square in Cairo, the epicenter of the 2011 protests. One of the largest photographic collections in the archive belongs to journalist and blogger Hossam El-Hamalawy, who continued to chronicle protests in the square through 2013.\par
In the documentary section, the archive features dozen of films, including Ahmed Rashwan\rquote s Born on the 25th of January (2011) which tracks four months of the revolutions through the director\rquote s eyes. The section also includes Mostafa Fathi\rquote s Egyptian Tank Man, a viral video showing a lone Egyptian protester confronting an armored tank that used a water cannon to disperse the crowds.\par
Warwick\rquote s collection also pays attention to other archival projects like Tahrir Documents, an archive of activist papers translated to English, and Amira Hanafi\rquote s interactive \ldblquote Dictionary of the Revolution\rdblquote  (2017) which documented the way Egyptians perceive key terms of the revolution. Hanafi has woven imagined dialogues based on tens of interviews she conducted with ordinary citizens.\par
Nine years after the uprising, Egypt is again ruled by a military strongman, General Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, who assumed power in a coup d\rquote etat in 2013. Is there still hope for the revolution? \ldblquote Be patient, Egypt,\rdblquote  said poet Tamim al-Barghouti, whose spoken-word poem is included in the archive, \ldblquote The light of day is about to emerge.\rdblquote\line\line\i captions:\line image1: A mural in Cairo celebrating the 25 January 2011 revolution in Egypt (photo by Nicola Pratt)\line\par
image2: Hossam el-Hamalawy, \ldblquote Freedom for Loai Nagati\rdblquote  (2011) (courtesy the artist via Flickr)\line\par
image3:A resistance mural in Cairo, 2011 (photo by Nicola Pratt)\par
\b\i0 2. (contrasting with one) SOUL\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.dailyartmagazine.com/the-art-and-politics-of-frida-kahlo/ }}{\fldrslt{https://www.dailyartmagazine.com/the-art-and-politics-of-frida-kahlo/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line Marxist, Nationalist, Feminist: The Art and Politics of Frida Kahlo\line\b0 by KACKPER GRASS \b  \b0 November 26, 2018\line He is a postgraduate student with an academic background in language, literature, and political science. During his studies, he gained several years of experience working in the field of foreign language education, both in the United States and Europe. He is a writer on the subject of art history, focusing particularly on Latin American and Spanish modernist movements. Apart from pursuing his personal research and publications, he currently works as an ESL teacher and editor. \par
Marxist, Nationalist, Feminist \f1\endash  these are words that describe not only the political convictions but also the artwork of Frida Kahlo. Although born as Magdalena Carmen Frida Kahlo y Calder\f0\'f3n outside of Mexico City in 1907, Kahlo eventually shortened her name and frequently told people that she was born in 1910, the year that widespread political unrest finally culminated in the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution.\par
After nine and a half years of conflict, the revolution resulted in a dramatic shift in Mexican politics and culture. The ousting of the ruling elite paved the way for a new constitution, which in turn resulted in radical land reforms, equal pay laws for women, and the introduction of socialist currents to the country\rquote s political landscape.\line The Revolutionary Artist\par
Growing up in the fervor of the revolution, Kahlo was deeply inspired by the resurgence of national pride and the spread of progressive ideas that followed. Her work Moses, painted as a reaction to Sigmund Freud\rquote s book Moses and Monotheism, exemplifies many of these social and political attitudes. Namely, the central focus of the mural is the symbolization of the female reproductive organs along with the sun and the rain as the universal givers of life. The top left corner is dedicated to Mexico\rquote s indigenous Aztec culture, which is placed on an even level with representations of ancient Egyptian civilization as well as the Greek, Hebrew, and Christian religions of classical antiquity. Below the level of the gods is that of people whom Kahlo considered to be great historical figures: Stalin, Lenin, Marx, Gandhi, and Christ, amongst others. It is interesting to note the ironic inclusion of Hitler, whom the artist referred to as the \ldblquote lost child,\rdblquote  within this group. Finally, the bottom level depicts a tumultuous representation of the masses as a symbol of human and societal evolution.\line Apart from the Mexican Revolution, perhaps the greatest source of inspiration in Kahlo\rquote s life was her lifelong partner Diego Rivera. The two artists married in 1929 and moved to the United States the following year. While her husband was busy painting a number of commissioned works, Kahlo grew increasingly homesick and unhappy over the course of their three-year stay. On a more political level, this period made her quite critical of the United States, which she viewed as the embodiment of exploitative industrialization and capitalism.\line Her Self-Portrait on the Borderline Between Mexico and the United States illustrates a clear dichotomy between the two countries. The Mexican side is represented by colorful images of nature, history, and cultural heritage, whereas a landscape of dull grey factories and pollution is used to represent the United States. While the flag in Kahlo\rquote s left hand makes it clear where the artist\rquote s loyalties lie, it is important to note the electricity generator that supplies power to the pedestal that reads \ldblquote Carmen Rivera painted her portrait in the year of 1932.\rdblquote  Equally important is the fact that the same generator is parasitically attached to the roots of the plants on the other side of the border, an allusion to the exploitative nature of the United States\rquote  relationship with its southern neighbors.\line Although one of Rivera\rquote s commissions was to paint Man at the Crossroads, a mural in praise of industrial advancement for the Rockefeller Center, Kahlo expressed her views on the topic in a much different way. My Dress Hangs There takes the form of a disorderly collage of commercial advertisements, celebrity culture, and social unrest against the backdrop of a concrete jungle where modern skyscrapers mix with kitsch Greek structures and a medieval church. In effect, it appears that the only authentic item in this chaotic scene is the artist\rquote s traditional Tehuana dress, the focal point of the work.\line Despite being a high-ranking member of the Mexican Communist Party for several years before his tour of the United States, an ideological dispute with other members of the central committee ultimately led to Rivera\rquote s expulsion in 1929. In solidarity with her husband, Kahlo also left the pro-Stalinist party, and the couple\rquote s political sympathies began to shift in support of the exiled Leon Trotsky over the next several years. In 1937, they managed to persuade the leftist government of President L\'e1zaro C\'e1rdenas to grant Trotsky and his wife, Natalia Sedova, asylum in Mexico and invited the couple to stay with them in La Casa Azul, Frida Kahlo\rquote s family home. Nonetheless, Rivera\rquote s discovery that Trotsky and Kahlo were having an affair, one of many infidelities that marked the couple\rquote s troubled marriage, forced Trotsky to seek refuge elsewhere.\line Upon moving out of Casa Azul, at the request of his wife, Trotsky left behind a self-portrait that Kahlo had painted for his fifty-eighth birthday. In the painting, Kahlo presents herself in a stately and seductive manner, holding a paper that reads \ldblquote To Leon Trotsky, with all my love, I dedicate this painting on the 7th of November 1937. Frida Kahlo in San \'c1ngel, Mexico.\rdblquote  The Russian couple eventually managed to find a residence not far from Casa Azul, but in May 1940 a failed attempt on Trotsky\rquote s life was carried out by the Soviet agent Iosif Grigulevich and the muralist David Alfaro Siqueiros, who remained loyal to the Mexican Communist Party after Rivera\rquote s departure. Nonetheless, the second attempt, this time executed by the Spanish agent Ram\'f3n Mercader in August of the same year, was successful. Leon Trotsky died in Mexico City on August 21st, 1940.\line Following Stalin\rquote s death in March 1953, Kahlo began work on a painting in his honor. Her self-portrait with the \ldblquote Great Leader\rdblquote  elevates Stalin to a position of almost religious importance, a status he held throughout his thirty-year rule in the Soviet Union. Nonetheless, despite her reverence, Kahlo was unable to paint the portrait with the precision and clarity of her previous works, as severe pain from a bus accident in her youth and a lifetime of other health problems required her to take increasingly stronger medications that affected her artistic technique.\line In her final days, Kahlo painted her last political work, Marxism Will Give Health to the Sick. Suffering from constant pain, declining health, and the impediments of heavy medications, Kahlo depicts Marx as a god-like being who is about to take her to heaven while at the same time punish the unjust forces of capitalism and imperialism. Knowing that she is about to die, Kahlo strips her top to reveal the leather corset that had been supporting her broken back since the bus accident and drops her crutches to grasp not a Bible but a little red book\f1\emdash the Communist Manifesto. Frida Kahlo died on July 13th, 1954 in Mexico City. The following day, a public procession accompanied her body, draped in a flag featuring the hammer and sickle, from the Palacio de Bellas Artes to the Pante\f0\'f3n Civil de Dolores, where she was cremated. Indeed, her last wish was to be remembered as the stern and unshakable revolutionary whom Diego Rivera had painted at the center of The Arsenal a year before they got married, distributing arms to her countrymen in preparation for the next Mexican Revolution.\line\line\i captions:\line img 1: Frida Kahlo, Moses, 1945, Houston Museum of Fine Arts\line\line img2: Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait on the Borderline Between Mexico and the United States, 1932, Private Collection\line\line img3: Frida Kahlo, My Dress Hangs There, 1933, Hoover Gallery\line\line img 4: Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait Dedicated to Leon Trotsky, 1937, National Museum for Women in the Arts\line\line img 5: Frida Kahlo, Self-Portrait with Stalin, 1954, Frida Kahlo Museum\par
\b\i0\lang1040 3. BODY\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.artlyst.com/reviews/hannah-hoch-social-conscience-and-political-commentator-of-unmediated-expression/ }}{\fldrslt{https://www.artlyst.com/reviews/hannah-hoch-social-conscience-and-political-commentator-of-unmediated-expression/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line Hannah Hoch: Social Conscience And Political Commentator Of Unmediated Expression\line\b0 by PAUL BLACK   1 February 2014\line Biography not found\par
Hannah H\'f6ch was a pioneer Dadaist of 1920\rquote s Berlin. Somewhat forgotten, or at least pigeon-holed by art history; a social provocateur who clashed with the Nazis and was found guilty of Entartete Kunst(degenerate art).\par
The exhibition is a survey of the artist\rquote s works on paper and is the first major exhibition of H\'f6ch\rquote s art in Great Britain, bringing together over 100 works from major international collections. The exhibition examines H\'f6ch\rquote s career from the 1910\rquote s to the 1970\rquote s \f1\endash  if circumnavigating her prolific array of oil painting and drawing \endash  the exhibition at least focuses on her most remembered output \endash  photo-montage and collage \endash  and her works of \lquote fantastische kunst\rquote .  \par
 H\f0\'f6ch\rquote s art was often an astute social satire on the female form, and the politics of Europe. The artist\rquote s  human condition is resolutely female, and reflects her own experiences. A reflection of the female form and identity in society, as well as art.\par
 These were figurative abstractions of tension and urgency. A juxtaposition of formal abstract aesthetics and emotional socio-cultural clout \f1\endash  initially reflecting a period of enthusiasm and great change in a post First World War Berlin.\par
Yet H\f0\'f6ch\rquote s art was radical in contrast to the purely formal concerns of the Dadaist movement. The \lquote simultaneous muddle of noises\rquote  that the Dada Manifesto called for was discarded by H\'f6ch for a certain aesthetic balance, a definite composition, and a narrative structure, often politicised.\par
This one-woman Dadaist revolution also reflected a more obvious socio-political content and feminist drive, prevalent in the creative party of 1920\rquote s Berlin, eventually to be trampled under booted heel by a \lquote mad, inhuman, bestial clique\rquote  \f1\endash  as the artist herself described the Nazis \endash  once she was no longer muted by their tyranny.\par
In fact the Second World War saw the artist publicly derided for her degenerate works and she lived out the war in cautious seclusion. A period that saw no public displays of her work, or opinion. Yet her art was spared exhibition in Die Ausstellung Entartete Kunst \endash  the Degenerate Art exhibition of 1937 \endash  as many of her peers fled Europe to America to continue the movement.  \par
But it was the compositional harmony of H\f0\'f6ch\rquote s work as opposed to the \lquote anti-art\rquote  of the Dada aesthetic that may have been the reason for her seeming erasure from  Dadaist history. It was in the 1920\rquote s that fellow Dadaists John Heartfield, and George Grosz decried her inclusion in the First International Dada Fair.\par
Also the fact that fellow German Dadaists considered their female peers \lquote charming and gifted amateurs\rquote , suggests that left-wing art movements were not spared sexism even in a progressive Berlin.\par
H\'f6ch was also an artist exploring the contradictions of her own identity juxtaposed against a society in either post-war ascension or decline, whether in the darkening clouds of a pre-war Berlin with a tableaux of a fluid sexuality and social conscience, or with more than a glimmer of biting satirical wit.  \par
The \lquote Ethnographic Museum\rquote  series, in which large heads from African sculptures appear on bodies of European women have encouraged a didactic response amongst art historians in the past, suggesting that these works offer a critique of Germany\rquote s imperial sojourns into Africa.\par
If anything they were more likely to be a reference to the endless use of the female form in art, juxtaposing the totemic iconography of a \lquote fertile\rquote  African aesthetic of the time with the social freedoms of a 1920\rquote s Berlin \f1\endash  but with the slight nuance of exploitation.\par
There are certainly references to the gaze of the viewer and objectification of the female form, and it\rquote s socially disempowering consequences, bringing to mind; \lquote The surveying woman is a man, the surveyed woman is a woman\rquote , a notion that H\f0\'f6ch would probably agree with, if not the language with which the concept is posited.\par
The stark nature of racial inequality in a 1930\rquote s Germany was also referenced on several occasions in the artist\rquote s work \f1\endash  a courageous act in the period of the Weimar republic.\par
There is also an anachronistic tendency to read a feminist agenda when viewing the works \endash  yet the female figures of H\f0\'f6ch\rquote s photo-montages often express a knowing place, not only within the composition, but in history, both art history and cultural history; while creating mischief in their own social present.\par
H\'f6ch was not a follower of the strict formalist theory of Dadaism \f1\endash   hers was a detail of arrangement \endash  abstracted social-conceptual imagery \endash  often focusing on the female form and with a political vibrancy \endash  a power to excite an anarchic aesthetic reflecting a period of tumultuous social upheaval.\par
But post World War Two H\f0\'f6ch\rquote s insightful and piercing aesthetic softened into lyrical abstraction. The artist\rquote s anarchic social criticism was worn down by the fear of Nazi oppression \f1\endash  or maybe this was a reflection of a new found social and artistic freedom; her social commentary was quieter and her \lquote attacks\rquote  less ferocious.\par
One of the artist\rquote s final works; \lquote Lebensbild (Life Portrait) 1973\rquote , Is a complex photo-montage including images of H\f0\'f6ch throughout her career. Having lived through one of the most eventful centuries in human history, she embraced the new media of \lquote photo-matter\rquote  often using it to comment on the very subjects it had captured.\par
Amongst the detailed collage is an almost hidden image from the Apollo moon landings and the famous image of \lquote Earth Rise\rquote . H\'f6ch\rquote s figure is collaged into the image as an almost final act of mischief and a clever narrative of artist as attestor to the world. Human action processed through the eye of the artist as social conscience and political commentator of unmediated expression. \par
As H\'f6ch is not only observing the moon landing but peering over the shoulder of the astronaut, with magnifying glass in hand looking back at, and observing the earth. The most objective view of ourselves in history. A conceit to a lifetime of critical study and manipulation of the photograph, and a modest, almost hidden statement of witness to a lifetime of change, and an artist\rquote s moral obligation.\line\line\i captions:\line img1: Dada Puppen (Dada Dolls) 1916, Fabric, yarn, thread, board, and beads - Berlinische Galerie. Landesmuseum fur Moderne Kunst, Fotografie und Architektur \line\line img 2: Heads of State 1918-20, Heads of State is built around a newspaper photograph of the German president Friedrich Ebert and his Minister of Defense, Gustav Noske. Having carefully cut the men out, H\'f6ch proceeded to create a composition with characteristically disjunctive and unexpected outcomes.\line\line img 3: Cut With the Kitchen Knife Through the Last Weimar Beer-Belly Cultural Epoch in Germany, 1919-20, Though one of H\'f6ch's earliest works, this ambitious collage is unusual within her canon for being particularly large; it measures 35 x 57 inches. Here she uses cuttings from newspapers and magazines to create one cohesive image out of a myriad of disparate parts.\line\par
\b\i0\lang16 4.   (contrasting with 3) BODY\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://hyperallergic.com/547946/artists-defend-human-dignity-in-the-face-of-institutional-dehumanization/ }}{\fldrslt{https://hyperallergic.com/547946/artists-defend-human-dignity-in-the-face-of-institutional-dehumanization/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line Artists Defend Human Dignity in the Face of Institutional Dehumanization\line\b0 by GREG RUFFING   \b  \b0 March 23, 2020\line Greg Ruffing is an artist, writer, and independent curator splitting his time between the Southwest and Midwest. \par
70 miles north of the US\f1\endash Mexico border, Other TARGET/s condemns migrant detention, mass incarceration, and the juvenile justice system, by reaffirming a sense of shared humanity.\line TUCSON, Arizona \emdash  Amidst our sociopolitical environment of hostility, racism, dehumanization, and lack of compassion, there is an ongoing necessity to speak truth to power, to examine its mechanisms of division and domination, and its desperation to maintain the fragile legitimacy of social order. Simultaneously, the degrading manipulations and rhetorical schemes of entrenched power structures must be resisted by telling stories that instead reaffirm a sense of shared humanity, belonging, dignity, and respect for differences. The group exhibition Other TARGET/s at the University of Arizona Museum of Art \emdash  featuring work by sheri crider, Gabriela Mu\f0\'f1oz, M. Jenea Sanchez, and Shontina Vernon \f1\emdash  attempts to take on that dual task.\par
Displayed prominently in the gallery, crider\rquote s \ldblquote Nontactical Monument for Reparations\rdblquote  is a sculptural replica of rescue beacons that US Customs and Border Protection has mounted in the harsh deserts of Arizona where thousands of border crossers have died in the past 20 years. Beneath its blue siren, a bound stack of papers lists death reports of detainees who have perished in ICE custody. This combination by crider reinforces the complicated function of the beacons: yes, they can save lives, but rescue also often leads to detainment \emdash  and, increasingly, indefinite detention.\par
This and other pieces establish a certain place-specificity of the exhibition: Tucson is a major focal point in immigration debates, due to its location only 70 miles from the US-Mexico border and within an hour of five migrant detention centers \emdash  four of which are run by private for-profit companies.\line The prison-industrial complex is addressed in crider\rquote s wall installation \ldblquote Arizona \emdash  The Grand Carceral State,\rdblquote  an array of 66 commemorative plates, 15 of which are commercial souvenirs crider gathered, and the rest are ceramic imitations she created. Their imagery ranges from tourist kitsch about the Grand Canyon, to incisive commentary on WWII internment camps, the anti-immigrant sheriff Joe Arpaio, and related issues. While the installation\rquote s shape in the state outline may be a bit heavy-handed, its operative confusion of actual versus fictitious objects feels like a crucial caution against normalizing such dehumanizing actions and policies.\par
For crider, focusing on the scope of mass incarceration is informed by her own past experience of being imprisoned. Her painting \ldblquote Cibola Detention Center, Five years, $150mil, Silence still equals death,\rdblquote  stitches together references to trans pride symbols, queer activism, and the mistreatment of transgender women and non-binary migrants held at the Cibola facility in New Mexico. Meanwhile, Vernon\rquote s short film \ldblquote Grrrl Justice\rdblquote  looks at girls and queer youth of color who have been impacted by the juvenile justice system. We see three protagonists move through vignettes of alienation, abuse, and homophobic harassment, but ultimately emerge to assert their own agency and voice.\line Such portraits of resiliency also connect to Sanchez and Mu\f0\'f1oz\rquote s work with women in the border town of Agua Prieta, Mexico. In particular, six large color photographs carry a commanding presence in the gallery. Part of Sanchez\rquote s larger project \ldblquote The Mexican Woman\rquote s Post-Apocalyptic Survival Guide to the Southwest: Food, Clothing, Shelter, y la Migra,\rdblquote  these compelling images present women of color in a space of empowerment where they tend the land, hone energy conservation and water preservation techniques, and hold meetings and workshops in an adobe brick building they constructed themselves. Additional sculptures and a short video, all produced by Sanchez and Mu\'f1oz together, point to ways that the women preserve and pass along familial knowledge. While cumulatively documenting the generosity and shared labor through which these women thrive together, these works also accomplish something else beyond merely showing: depicting their subjects with grace and dignity, they hold space for the women to be active contributors to their own representation and craft bold counter-narratives to the forces that seek to diminish their humanity.\line\line\i captions:\line image 1: sheri crider, \ldblquote Cibola Detention Center, Five years, $150mil, Silence still equals death\rdblquote  (2018), gouache and enamel on paper (courtesy the University of Arizona Museum of Art)\line\line image 2: Installation view: sheri crider, \ldblquote Arizona \f1\emdash  The Grand Carceral State\rdblquote  (courtesy the University of Arizona Museum of Art)\line\line\f0\lang1040 image 3: M. Jenea Sanchez \ldblquote Do\'f1a Euginia\rdblquote  (2016), C Print on Aluminum (courtesy the University of Arizona Museum of Art)\line\i0\par
\b 5. STATE\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-new-objectivity-artists-exposed-decadence-hypocrisy-german-society }}{\fldrslt{https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-new-objectivity-artists-exposed-decadence-hypocrisy-german-society\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line New Objectivity Artists Exposed the Decadence and Hypocrisy of German Society\line\b0 by CATH POUND  Sept 24 2018\line Biography not found\line\par
Many German artists entered World War I enthusiastically, believing it would bring about positive social change. However, the horrors they experienced in the trenches, and their country\rquote s humiliating defeat, left them bitter and disillusioned at the seemingly futile bloodletting. In the aftermath, the freedom of form and color associated with pre-war Expressionism seemed out of touch with the pervasive post-war cynicism. In this context, many artists turned toward a new kind of realism with a biting satirical edge, a style which came to be known as Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity).\par
The movement never had a formal manifesto; it took its name from a 1923 exhibition at the Kunsthalle Mannheim organized by director Gustav Friedrich Hartlaub. Hartlaub featured artists working in a diverse range of styles, including Georg Schrimpf, George Grosz, Otto Dix, Max Beckmann, and Alexander Kanoldt, but felt their work embodied a purely German aesthetic.\line At the same time, art critic Franz Roh referred to the style as \ldblquote Magic Realism,\rdblquote  which he saw as a far more pan-European movement that incorporated the classicizing retour \'e0 l\rquote ordre (return to order) aesthetic of Pablo Picasso and Andr\'e9 Derain in Paris, as well as the metaphysical art of Giorgio de Chirico and Carlo Carr\'e0 in Italy. The influence of de Chirico certainly had an impact on many German artists, who adapted his eerie, featureless figures into their own works.\par
Matthew Gale, co-curator of the exhibition \ldblquote Magic Realism: Art in Weimar Germany 1919\f1\endash 33\rdblquote  at Tate Modern in London, suggested that Magic Realism has become so inextricably linked with Germany because of \ldblquote the social and political plunge\'85the total collapse of structures by which society was held together,\rdblquote  which most acutely affected that country. This upheaval inspired German artists to turn a uniquely harsh mirror on their rapidly changing society. \line Though not unified by a manifesto, the work of artists such as Grosz, Dix, and Beckmann, along with Rudolf Schlichter\f0  \f1 and Jeanne Mammen, shows a tension between the increasing freedoms of their modernizing society and the trauma and devastation caused by war.\par
Dix was particularly attuned to the horrors of battle and the manner in which the German people had spurned those who fought for their country. In The War (1924)\emdash his viscerally powerful portfolio of prints based largely on his own harrowing experiences as a soldier\emdash Dix exploits the corrosive nature of etching and aquatint to heighten the sense of decay in his portrayals of bomb-blasted landscapes and decomposing bodies. The appalling human cost of World War I is shown to brutally satirical effect in The Skat Players \endash  Card Playing War Invalids (1920). Featuring three appallingly injured soldiers, Dix\rquote s painting suggests that war is nothing more than a gamble played between men. \line In The Night (1919), Beckmann reveals his own nihilistic worldview. Though not a battle scene, the painting depicts a man being brutally strangled while his wife is seen stripped and bound to a beam with a clear suggestion that she has been raped. The claustrophobic and angular environment seems to entrap both victims and aggressors, offering no escape from the pointless suffering.\par
Post-war society appeared to offer new opportunities to women, both professionally and socially, and Weimar\rquote s famous cabaret scene, which welcomed gay men and women, posited a relaxing of conservative morals. Yet there was a sense among artists that these liberties came at the expense of weaker members of society, particularly war veterans. At the same time, women\rquote s new economic and social power aroused antipathy among certain artists.\par
The central panel of Dix\rquote s triptych Metropolis (1927\endash 28) features a raucous nightclub scene in which an archetypal \ldblquote new woman,\rdblquote  identified by her fashionable flapper outfit and closely cropped haircut, flaunts her newfound social freedom, while in the left and right panels, homeless, war-injured cripples are ignored by a series of gaudily attired prostitutes. In Grosz\rquote s Suicide (1916), the action seems to have played out on a stage; the two men performed their deaths for the benefit of a prostitute, who gazes out indifferently from a curtained window.\line This antagonism towards women also manifests in the disturbingly prevalent lustmord (lust murder) genre that emerged during this time. Paintings such as Rudolf Schlichter\rquote s The Artist with Two Hanged Women (1924) fetishize sexual violence against women while superficially condemning it. \par
In marked contrast, the work of Jeanne Mammen, a successful professional artist and quintessential \ldblquote new woman,\rdblquote  shows \ldblquote an awareness of the place that women were staking out in society,\rdblquote  Gale said. Independent and intelligent, Mammen\rquote s women wait languidly for something to entertain them in Boring Dolls (1929) and offer their own critique of the war in At the Shooting Gallery (1929), in which a fairground assistant hands a gun to a male customer, her expression revealing an unreserved contempt for the damage she knows boys can wreak with their toys.\line Although Dix produced works in the lustmord genre himself, he also offered one of the defining images of the liberated Weimar woman in his Portrait of the journalist Sylvia von Harden (1926). Like many artists of the time, Dix chose sitters who could portray certain archetypes. Harden\rquote s androgynous appearance\emdash her cropped hair and monocle are complemented by her insouciant manner and cigarette\emdash was representative to Dix of an entire epoch. Christian Schad\rquote s Self Portrait with Model (1927) incorporates another strikingly modern woman in an image that questions notions of identity and appearance. Both paintings show a fascination with Old Master techniques and conventions; many artists turned their attention to craftsmanship as a means of dealing with the chaos around them.\line Although Dix produced works in the lustmord genre himself, he also offered one of the defining images of the liberated Weimar woman in his Portrait of the journalist Sylvia von Harden (1926). Like many artists of the time, Dix chose sitters who could portray certain archetypes. Harden\rquote s androgynous appearance\emdash her cropped hair and monocle are complemented by her insouciant manner and cigarette\emdash was representative to Dix of an entire epoch. Christian Schad\rquote s Self Portrait with Model (1927) incorporates another strikingly modern woman in an image that questions notions of identity and appearance. Both paintings show a fascination with Old Master\f0  \f1  techniques and conventions; many artists turned their attention to craftsmanship as a means of dealing with the chaos around them.\f0\line New Objectivity\rquote s abiding legacy, however, is the manner in which it turned its penetrative gaze to a uniquely turbulent period in history like no other art movement had before, or has since. \b\line\b0\par
\i captions:\line img 1: Max Beckmann, The Night (Die Nacht), 1918-19. Photo via Wikimedia Commons.\line\par
img 2: Otto Dix, The Skat Players - Card Playing War Invalids, 1920 , Nationalgalerie, Staatliche Museen, Berlin\line\par
img 3: George Grosz, Suicide, 1916. \'a9 Estate of George Grosz, Princeton, New Jersey, 2018. Courtesy of Tate\par
img 4: Rudolf Schlichter, The Artist with Two Hanged Women, 1924. \'a9 Viola Roehr v, Alvenslben, Muenchen. Courtesy of Tate. \line\par
img 5: Jeanne Mammen, Boring Dolls, 1929. \'a9 DACS, 2018. Courtesy of Tate. \line\par
img 6: Otto Dix, Portrait of the journalist Sylvia von Harden, 1926, Mus\'e9e National d'Art Moderne, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris\par
\b\i0 6.  (contrasting with 5) STATE\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/20/arts/design/vida-americana-mexican-muralists-whitney.html }}{\fldrslt{https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/20/arts/design/vida-americana-mexican-muralists-whitney.html\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line How Mexico\rquote s Muralists Lit a Fire Under U.S. Artists\line\b0 by HOLLAND COTTER        Feb. 20 2020\line Holland Cotter is co-chief art critic of The New York Times, where he has been on staff since 1998. He was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism in 2009. He writes on a wide range of art, old and new, and he has made extended trips to Africa and China for The Times. A fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, he has degrees from Harvard College, Columbia University and the City University of New York.\line\par
From floated proposal to finished product, \ldblquote Vida Americana: Mexican Muralists Remake American Art, 1925-1945\rdblquote  at the Whitney Museum of American Art represents a decade of hard thought and labor, and the effort has paid off. The show is stupendous, and complicated, and lands right on time. Just by existing it accomplishes three vital things. It reshapes a stretch of art history to give credit where credit is due. It suggests that the Whitney is, at last, en route to fully embracing \ldblquote American Art.\rdblquote  And it offers yet another argument for why the build-the-wall mania that has obsessed this country for the past three-plus years just has to go. Judging by the story told here, we should be actively inviting our southern neighbor northward to enrich our cultural soil.\par
That story, a hemispheric one, begins in Mexico in the 1920s. After 10 years of civil war and revolution, that country\rquote s new constitutional government turned to art to invent and broadcast a unifying national self-image, one that emphasized both its deep roots in indigenous, pre-Hispanic culture and the heroisms of its recent revolutionary struggles.\par
The chosen medium for the message was mural painting \f1\emdash  monumental, accessible, anti-elitist, in the public domain. And three very differently gifted practitioners quickly came to dominate the field: Diego Rivera, Jos\f0\'e9 Clemente Orozco and David Alfaro Siqueiros: \ldblquote Los Tres Grandes\rdblquote  \f1\emdash  \ldblquote the three great ones\rdblquote  \emdash  as they came to be known among admirers.\par
Many of those admirers were artists in the United States. Some had heard word of a lush, affordable, artist-honoring tropical utopia, and traveled south to experience it for themselves. Others, alert to social inequities rampant under United States capitalism \emdash  to be laid bare by the Great Depression \emdash  wanted to make art a tool for social change and took the Mexican revolutionary experiment as a model.\line For all parties, the model was an exhilarating one, and the bright pink walls of the exhibition\rquote s opening gallery suggest a fiesta atmosphere, as do the paintings gathered there: Alfredo Ramos Mart\f0\'ednez\rquote s 1929 image of an itinerant flower vendor bending under her load of calla lilies; a 1928 painting by Rivera of Oaxacan  dancers in orchidaceous gowns; and, from the same year, a scene, in Rivera\rquote s volumetric, smooth-brushed, Paris-trained style, of women harvesting cactus by the American artist Everett Gee Jackson.\par
Jackson (1900-1995), who was born in Texas and trained at the Art Institute of Chicago, made an art jaunt to Mexico in 1923 and stayed four years. He saw Rivera\rquote s mural work in Mexico City and created his own variation on what had already become a local \ldblquote national\rdblquote  style. There he also met Anita Brenner, a Mexican writer of Latvian Jewish descent, who was the fulcrum of a lively international community, and whose widely read 1929 book \ldblquote Idols Behind Altars\rdblquote  \f1\emdash  there\rquote s a copy on display \emdash  introduced North Americans to the history of Mexican culture, from pre-Columbian times forward.\par
Turn a corner into the next gallery and you find work from around the same time but on overtly polemical themes. It was important for a nation that identified itself with populist struggle to keep the memory of that struggle burning, and art was on the job. You see this in a large charcoal painting study by Rivera of the firebrand revolutionary Emiliano Zapata trampling an enemy underfoot. And in an inky Siqueiros portrait of the same leader, looking as blank-eyed as a corpse. And in a spiky, depressed Orozco painting of the peasant guerrillas known as Zapatistas, their figures as stiff as the machetes they carry, locked in a grim forced march.\line By the time these pictures were made in 1931, two of the artists were working primarily in the United States; the third would arrive the next year. There were reasons for this northern influx of \f0\'e9migr\'e9 talent. With a change of leaders in Mexico, mural commissions had dropped off, and far-left politics \f1\emdash  Rivera and Siqueiros self-identified as Communists \emdash  had become less welcome. Something like the opposite was true in the United States, where young artists radicalized by the Depression were eager to explore the possibilities of social consciousness-raising public art. To work with these masters was a dream come true.\par
Orozco came first, to New York in 1927. There he taught easel painting and printmaking to a rapt cohort of local artists before moving on to California to execute a mural commission for Pomona College in Claremont \emdash  a 1930 fresco called \ldblquote Prometheus\rdblquote  that the teenage Jackson Pollock, then living in Los Angeles, saw and never forgot.\line Obviously, the impossibility of having actual fresco projects in an exhibition that puts their existence at its center is a problem. But the show\rquote s originating curator, Barbara Haskell \emdash  joined by Marcela Guerrero, Sarah Humphreville and Alana Hernandez \emdash  has finessed the matter by surrounding photographic reproductions of monumental works with real, related paintings and drawings.\par
Some are studies done for the featured fresco, as in a tempera-on-canvas Orozco sketch of his Prometheus figure. Others are exceptional distillations of the artist\rquote s spirit and style. Of the three marquee Mexican muralists, Orozco was the least politically hard-line, the most pessimistic by temperament, and the most poetic-minded. And it is two stand-alone images \emdash  one of a flaming, air-walking Blakean nude; the other, on loan from the Museo de Arte Carrillo Gil in Mexico City, of a furious Jesus hacking his cross to bits \emdash  that make the deepest impression here.\par
Most valuably, though, the curators have also included work by young American artists inspired by Orozco\rquote s example. Pollock is one. Several livid, snarly, body-based paintings from the late 1930s show how thoroughly \ldblquote Prometheus\rdblquote  had gotten under his skin. And the influence seems to have passed, by art world osmosis \emdash  many artists were networked through working on W.P.A. mural projects at the time \emdash  to artists like the Chicago-based Charles White, who applied a version of Orozco\rquote s brand of muscular expressionism to his own epical paintings of African-American life.\par
From this point on in the exhibition, although the Mexican muralists continue to be the anchor, American art crowds the spotlight. Rivera, as befits his celebrity, is awarded two separate spaces. But works by artists who learned from him \emdash  Ben Shahn, Philip Evergood, Thelma Johnson Streat, Xavier Gonzalez and Marion Greenwood \emdash  outnumber his own. You can see why he was a popular model. There\rquote s something expressively boilerplate about his art, making it adaptable to varied uses and settings and patronage. This was one reason that, as the 1930s went on, more ideologically committed artists like Siqueiros began to brand him a sellout.\par
Siqueiros was the true on-the-ground activist of the three \emdash  he participated in a plot to assassinate Trotsky \emdash  and the one who took the most radical formal chances in his art. He is also given two galleries. The first is ostensibly devoted to his 1932 stay in Los Angeles and a mural he painted there, \ldblquote Tropical America: Oprimida y Destrozada por los Imperialismos\rdblquote  \emdash  or \ldblquote Tropical America: Oppressed and Destroyed by Imperialism.\rdblquote  But the people who commissioned it seem to have expected work on a different, upbeat theme and, offended by the scathing take on Yankee aggression, whited out the painting. (Chicano artists and activists lobbied for years to repair it, with the city and the Getty Conservation Institute teaming up to cover the cost, though as a gallery label notes, the brightness of its original colors proved to be unrecoverable. It appears in the show in a black-and-white photograph of its original state.)\par
What this gallery is really about, though, is the stellar young artists who assisted and emulated him, among them Philip Guston (a high school friend of Pollock) and the Japanese-American painter Eitaro Ishigaki, whose racial identity and immigrant status marginalized him as surely as they did black and Latino artists at the time. (In 1951, he was arrested by the F.B.I. for having Communist affiliations and deported to Japan.)\line The exhibition\rquote s final gallery, \ldblquote Siqueiros and the Experimental Workshop,\rdblquote  is basically a Siqueiros-Pollock showcase. It\rquote s set in New York, where, beginning in 1936, the two artists worked together as teacher and student. We see examples of the increasingly anti-conventional techniques the muralist developed: spraying, splattered, dripping paint, building up glazes in ugly lumps on the canvas surface, anything to make the results look unpolished and unsettling. And we see Pollock beginning to test out these unorthodoxies. He would, eventually, transcendently, apply them to abstraction. But it\rquote s clear that even in the 1930s he was on fire. And the evidence is that Siqueiros held the igniting match.\par
Is it too much to say that we owe Abstract Expressionism, at least the Pollock version of it, to Mexico? Maybe, but only a little too much. In any case, the debt was forgotten fast. Pollock stayed mum on the subject of sources. Once World War II started, the United States didn\rquote t want to know from anticapitalist leftists, or immigrants, particularly brown-skinned ones. After the war, Communist was a prosecutorial scare-word, and Abstract Expressionism was suddenly red-white-and-blue. It was advertised internationally as a visual embodiment of American freedom, with no mention, maybe no memory, of where its greatest practitioner learned his Ab-Ex moves.\par
This exhibition demonstrates this by putting Siqueiros and Pollock together and uses the same compare and contrast method throughout, often pairing canonical stars with artists we may not know, like Luis Arenal, Jes\f0\'fas Escobedo, Mardonio Maga\'f1a, Edward Millman, Alfredo Ramos Martinez, Mitchell Siporin, Henrietta Shore, and Thelma Johnson Streat. Did influence run both ways? Student to teacher? South to north and back? Undoubtedly. (And everyone learned from Europe.) The result at the Whitney is a study in multidirectional flow, tides meeting, mingling, which is the basic dynamic of art history, as it is, or should be, of American life. It\rquote s a dynamic of generosity. It gives the show warmth and grandeur. Why on earth would we want to stop the flow now?\line\line\i captions:\par
img 1: \ldblquote Zapatistas,\rdblquote  Clemente Orozco\rquote s 1931 painting of the Mexican peasant guerrillas in the exhibition \ldblquote Vida Americana: Mexican Muralists Remake American Art, 1925-1945.\rdblquote\line\par
img 2: Alfredo Ramos Mart\'ednez\rquote s \ldblquote Calla Lily Vendor,\rdblquote  1929\line\line img 3: \ldblquote Zapata,\rdblquote  David Alfaro Siqueiros\rquote s 1931 portrait of the firebrand leader Emiliano Zapata\line\par
\b\i0 7. SOUL \line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.nytimes.com/slideshow/2007/12/27/arts/1228-LAWR_index/s/1228-LAWR_slide1.html }}{\fldrslt{https://www.nytimes.com/slideshow/2007/12/27/arts/1228-LAWR_index/s/1228-LAWR_slide1.html\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  \line Jacob Lawrence, the migration series\line\b0 by FRED R.CONRAD   5 March 2018\line Bioraphy not found\par
Jacob Lawrence painted \ldblquote The Migration of the Negro,\rdblquote  60 small pictures in tempera on hardboard panels, at 33 West 125th Street in Harlem in 1941. Lawrence was 24. "With its visual tact and deep emotion, it was instantly recognized as a tour de force, a new American epic," says Holland Cotter. "It made his career."\line The series is about the shift of African-American populations from a poor and repressive rural South to a prosperous but unwelcoming urban North between the two world wars. Lawrence\rquote s family participated in that shift. For him it was lived history, an organic phenomenon, and he conceived his depiction of it that way. But two concurrent exhibitions \f1\emdash  one at the Whitney Museum of American Art, the other at Triple Candie, a nonprofit space in Harlem \emdash  suggest that his concept has not come down to us intact.\line Lawrence painted the 60 pictures not one at a time but production-line style, working on them all simultaneously. In a given studio session he would apply a single color to several paintings in progress. In the next session he would apply another color in the same way. Chromatic recurrence was one way he bound the series together. \par
The use of repeated motifs was another. Linear uprights \emdash  bare trees, prison bars, raised arms, flames \emdash  alternate with the flat planes of open skies or high walls to create a rhythm of escapes and enclosures punctuated by exclamations. Figures, often in silhouette, move, then wait, then move again. Descriptive captions under each image enhance a sense of unity. The series begins with these words: "During the World War there was a great migration North by Southern Negroes." It ends, "And the migrants kept coming."\f0\line "For Lawrence the series was a single work, and he wanted it exhibited as such. But from the start his wishes were ignored more often than not. In 1942 the Museum of Modern Art bought half the series: all the even-numbered pictures. The Phillips Gallery in Washington bought the others. Lawrence hoped that both institutions would cooperate in showing the two parts together, which they have. But an integrated work had been irrevocably broken, and the breaking continues." \line "But the show at the Whitney Museum represents a mere fragment of the Phillips Collection\rquote s larger fragment. The overarching drama of the series, the cumulative product of Lawrence\rquote s thought-through formal calculation and narrative subtlety, is, if not lost, much diminished. And such editing has spurred a second exhibition, 'Undoing the Ongoing Bastardization of 'The Migration of the Negro' by Jacob Lawrence,' at Triple Candie."\line "One of the virtues of the piece is that its parts are strong enough to stand on their own. From the opening patchwork image of crowds in a Southern railroad station pushing their way through gates marked 'Chicago,' 'New York' and 'St. Louis'; to one of Northern tenement buildings turned into modernist geometric abstractions; to a third image of the same buildings being bombed \f1\emdash  the explosions shoot up like bloodied shaving brushes \emdash  during an incident of racial violence."\line "There are two good reasons to visit the Triple Candie show: It presents the complete 'Migration of the Negro' series, or a version of it; and it shows it in the Harlem neighborhood where Lawrence created it, a neighborhood that became predominantly African-American as a direct result of that migration. I was just as moved to see the series in reproduction there as I was to see it complete in its original form at the Whitney six years ago, if for different reasons."\line "What's more real, after all, art or the feeling of it? History or the telling of it? Medium or message? We know the conventional market wisdom. It's important to have the alternative."\line\par
\i\f0 captions:\par
img 1: "During the World War there was a great migration North by Southern Negroes." (1940-41)\line\par
img 2: "Another great ravager of the crops was the boil weevil." (1940-41)\line\par
img 3: "In many places, because of the war, food had doubled in price." (1940-41)\line\line img 4: "They arrived in Pittsburgh, one of the great industrial centers of the North, in large numbers." (1940-41)\line\par
\b\i0 8. (contrasting with 7) SOUL\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/kentridge-felix-in-exile-t07479 }}{\fldrslt{https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/kentridge-felix-in-exile-t07479\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line William Kentridge, Felix in Exile 1994\line\b0 by ELIZABETH MANCHESTER  Feb 2000\line As Lipman Writer in Residence she is researching and writing about innovative contemporary art made using clay.\line Her own practice is currently exploring the potential of clay to receive the imprint of a gesture and what status the resulting object might have; it engages with Marcel Duchamp\rquote s notion of the infrathin in relation to the imprint and positive and negative casting, examined particularly through looking at Etant donn\'e9s and the erotic objects. \par
\line Kentridge makes short animation films from large-scale drawings in charcoal and pastel on paper. Each drawing, which contains a single scene, is successively altered through erasing and redrawing and photographed in 16 or 35mm film at each stage of its evolution. Remnants of successive stages remain on the paper, and provide a metaphor for the layering of memory which is one of Kentridge's principal themes. The films in this series, titled Drawings for Projection (see Tate T07482-5 and T07480-81), are set in the devastated landscape south of Johannesburg where derelict mines and factories, mine dumps and slime dams have created a terrain of nostalgia and loss. Kentridge's repeated erasure and redrawing, which leave marks without completely transforming the image, together with the jerky movement of the animation, operate in parallel with his depiction of human processes, both physical and political, enacted on the landscape. \par
Felix in Exile is Kentridge's fifth film. It was made from forty drawings and is accompanied by music by Phillip Miller and Motsumi Makhene. It introduces a new character to the series: Nandi, an African woman, who appears at the beginning of the film making drawings of the landscape. She observes the land with surveyor's instruments, watching African bodies, with bleeding wounds, which melt into the landscape. She is recording the evidence of violence and massacre that is part of South Africa's recent history. Felix Teitelbaum, who features in Kentridge's first and fourth films as the humane and loving alter-ego to the ruthless capitalist white South African psyche, appears here semi-naked and alone in a foreign hotel room, brooding over Nandi's drawings of the damaged African landscape, which cover his suitcase and walls. Felix looks at himself in the mirror while shaving and Nandi appears to him. They are connected to one another, through the mirror, by a double-ended telescope and embrace, but Nandi is later shot and absorbed back into the ground like the bodies she was observing earlier. A flood of blue water in the hotel room, brought about by the process of painful remembering, symbolises tears of grief and loss and the Biblical flood which promises new life. Kentridge has commented: 'Felix in Exile was made at the time just before the first general election in South Africa, and questioned the way in which the people who had died on the journey to this new dispensation would be remembered' (William Kentridge 1998, p.90). In this film Nandi's drawing could be read as an attempt to construct a new national identity through the preservation, rather than erasure, of brutal and racist colonial memory. \line\par
\i captions:\line\par
img 1: excerpt from the short film "Felix in Exile" 03:30\line\line img 2: excerpt from the short film "Felix in Exile" 00:20\line\line img3: excerpt from the short film "Felix in Exile" 07:25\par
img 4:excerpt from the short film "Felix in Exile" 05:04\par

\pard\sa200\sl240\slmult1 img 5:excerpt from the short film "Felix in Exile" 01:07\line\b\i0\line 9. BODY\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://frieze.com/article/ana-mendieta }}{\fldrslt{https://frieze.com/article/ana-mendieta\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line Anna Mendieta (1948-1985)\line\b0 by KRISTEN M.JONE\line\cf2\lang1033\fstretch5 based in Berkeley, California, founder and Creative Consultant of Wabisabi LCC. She studied at Maryland Institute College of Art. She worked for different years for Frieze magazine.\cf0\lang1040\fstretch0\line\line It\rquote s commonplace to note when exhibitions offer a timely opportunity to reconsider an artist\rquote s work, but in Ana Mendieta\rquote s case such observations are as disturbing as they are apt. \lquote Ana Mendieta: Earth Body, Sculpture and Performance, 1972\f1\endash 1985\rquote  follows a smattering of shows and thoughtful critical re-examinations that have cropped up in recent years, and it should contribute greatly toward fostering an appreciation of Mendieta\rquote s elusive yet rigorous projects. Not least important, it is accompanied by a substantial catalogue featuring incisive essays by Olga M. Viso, Chrissie Iles, Julia P. Herzberg and Guy Brett. But the prevailing misinterpretation, marginalization or outright dismissal of Mendieta\rquote s work since her premature death in 1985 have a particular sting. This re-evaluation is long overdue \endash  and much deserved.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 The show opens with striking photographic images that document early performances in which Mendieta enacted dramatic bodily transformations \endash  applying thick make-up, donning wigs, covering her face with a torn stocking \endash  whose similarity to later works by Cindy Sherman has been noted by more than one critic. Other photographs capture tough performances incorporating blood, which responded to Viennese Actionism as well as feminist concerns. The show pays special attention to these and other works Mendieta created during her decade-long stint at the University of Iowa, where she enthusiastically participated in Hans Breder\rquote s ground-breaking Intermedia programme. Breder (who was Mendieta\rquote s lover and occasional artistic collaborator before her marriage to Carl Andre) promoted an interdisciplinary, process-oriented approach to art-making, and brought an array of artists involved with Conceptual and Performance art to visit, including Scott Burton and Vito Acconci.\par
Equally important for Mendieta were trips she began to take to Mexico, which fed her growing fascination with pre-Columbian iconography. In Mexico she also made the first of her \lquote Siluetas\rquote  (1973\endash 80), richly developed, eerily symbolic works in which she cut, burnt, drew or otherwise shaped a human silhouette (usually her own) into an array of outdoor sites. In Cuba, the homeland from which she had been exiled at the age of 12 and to which she often longed to return, she produced her \lquote Rupestrian Sculptures\rquote  (1981), carving anthropomorphic shapes into ancient limestone grottoes. Questioning the tendency of much Earth art to dominate the landscape, she used the term \lquote Earth Body\rquote  to describe her ephemeral interventions. The stark beauty of the \lquote Siluetas\rquote  (all the more potent for being incidental) is hard to overstate \endash  in photographs and films red and white flowers glow against sand, water, or greenery; flames, sometimes tinted by the artist, burn against sky and earth.\par
Mendieta drew heavily on research about indigenous beliefs, including Santer\f0\'eda deities. Fearing essentialist readings, she eventually attempted to distance her work from association with feminist goddess cults, but biases were hard to shake. Sculptures and drawings Mendieta produced during the early 1980s are haunting but uncharacteristically static. On the other hand, the Super-8 films with which she carefully documented her actions form the show\rquote s radiant heart. Iles notes in the catalogue that \lquote just as Mendieta constructed each action and sculpture as a private act of meditation and dedication, she filmed each one in a way that allows it to be re-experienced.\rquote  Camera angles, distance, framing and colour contribute to their tense poetry. Shot from multiple vantage points in the film Untitled (Flower Person) (1975), a white peony figure floats down a creek on a bier then breaks apart, evoking the dying Ophelia. The spine-tingling footage of Anima, Silueta de Cohetes (Soul, Silhouette of Fireworks, 1976) shows the artist\rquote s wicker effigy exploding with fireworks at night-time.\line Mendieta produced nearly 80 of these films, making her, as Iles points out, the most prolific artist-\f1\endash filmmaker of the period. The tendency to overemphasize aspects of Mendieta\rquote s personal biography, especially her gender and tragic death, calls to mind similar problems with the critical reception of Eva Hesse\rquote s work. (In contrast, Robert Smithson\rquote s reputation was only enhanced by his early demise, which was perceived as unconnected to his artistic production rather than somehow inevitable.) But this Cuban \f0\'e9migr\'e9e knew that she faced multiple challenges in presenting her radically inventive work. A decade ago Luis Camnitzer wrote perceptively in his book New Art of Cuba of the rift between Mendieta\rquote s art and the contemporary American mainstream caused by the dual preoccupation with her work as \lquote ethnic and feminist\rquote . He wrote: \lquote The fact of her double separateness, along with the artificiality of the quota system, created a static that tended to interfere with a direct relationship to her work by the audience.\rquote  Camnitzer went on to quote derogatory remarks made by certain critics after Mendieta\rquote s death and to note that, even in 1994, the time was not ripe for adequate appreciation of her work. One hopes that time has finally arrived.\line\par
\i captions:\par
img 1: \cf2\i0\lang1033\fstretch5 Untitled: Silueta Series, Iowa, 1979, medium: lifetime color photograph, size: 50.8 x 33.7 cm. (20 x 13.3 in.)\par
img2 : Untitled (Self-portrait with blood) (6 works), 1973, medium: color coupler prints, size: 50.8 x 40.6 cm. (20 x 16 in.)\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\b 10 (contrasting with 9) BODY\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://strangeremains.com/2015/03/06/the-beauty-of-decomposition-in-japanese-watercolor/ }}{\fldrslt{https://strangeremains.com/2015/03/06/the-beauty-of-decomposition-in-japanese-watercolor/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line The beauty of human decompositon in Japanese watercolor \line\b0 by STRANGERMAINS\line\cf0\fweight500 a guest blogger for Atlas Obscura, Defrosting Cold Cases, and Forensic Magazine. He features articles on significant forensic anthropology cases and archaeological excavations, morbid history, gruesome burial traditions, skeletal collections and charnel houses, macabre art work, and human remains in the news.\cf2\fweight400\line\line\cf0\expndtw11 I think I might be obsessed with kusozu, Japanese watercolor paintings that graphically depict human decomposition, which were popular between the 13th and 19th centuries; Body of a Courtesan in Nine Stages is another series in this genre featured previously on this site.  Kusozu works of art were inspired by Buddhist beliefs and these paintings were meant to encourage people to ponder the temporary nature of the physical world.  Kusozu watercolors also happen to be fantastic early studies of human decay and taphonomy, which is why one series, titled Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, is currently on display as part of the Forensics: The Anatomy of Crime exhibit in London.\par
\expndtw8\par

\pard\sa200\sl240\slmult1 According to the Wellcome Collection, Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body was painted some time in the 18th century.  The below scenes include: (1) the woman\f1\rquote\f0 s impending death and her preparation for it;  the noble woman has just passed away and her loved ones are seated around her; (3) slight skin discoloration (maybe some liver mortis) and a bit of bloating of during early decomposition; (4) the onset of putrefaction with bloating and marbling; (5) advanced decomposition as seen by pervasive marbling, leakage of purge fluid from the mouth, and the abdominal cavity has burst open (6) caving of abdominal cavity and scavenging animals; (7) start of skeletonization and the disappearance of soft tissue; (8) complete skeletonization and scattering of remains; (9) finally human remains have been completely scattered or consumed by unseen animals so all that remains is a memorial for the deceased woman. \line\par
\i captions:\line\par
img 1: \expndtw0\i0 Kusozu (7): the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 6 of 9.Decomposition continues with the help of scavengers\cf3\f2\fs27 .\line\par
\cf0\f0\fs22\lang1040 img 2: \lang1033 Kusozu (2): the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 1 of 9. This first painting depicts a court lady in a kimono is seated indoors with a scroll in her left hand, upon which she has written her farewell poem. Image credit: Wellcome Collections \line\line img 3: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 2 of 9. In this painting the woman has died. She is laid on the floor covered in a blanket and is surrounded by loved ones. \line\line img 4:Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 3 of 9.The woman\rquote s body has been laid outside and there are early signs of bloating and discoloration.\par
img 5: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 4 of 9. Putrefaction has started with marbling and bloating\line\par
img 6: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 5 of 9.\line The body of the noble woman has entered an advance state of decay that shows purge fluid escaping the mouth, the abdominal cavity has burst open, and maybe signs of skin slippage. \par
img 7: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 6 of 9.\line Decomposition continues with the help of scavengers\par
img 8: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 7 of 9.\line The body has started to skeletonize; much of the soft tissue has been removed. \par
img 9: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 8 of 9\line The body has completely skeletonized and many of the bones have been scattered or carried away by unseen scavengers.\par
img 10: Kusozu: the death of a noble lady and the decay of her body, panel 9 of 9.\line In this final image the human remains are completely gone and all that remains is a memorial structure upon which the woman\rquote s Buddhist death-name is written in Sanskrit.\par
\par

\pard\b 11. SOUL\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/arts/design/jean-michel-basquiat-sothebys-auction.html }}{\fldrslt{https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/arts/design/jean-michel-basquiat-sothebys-auction.html\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\line How Basquiat Became the $60 Million Man \line\b0 by ROBIN POGREBIN | SCOTT REYBURN \line\cf2 R.P. (born May 17, 1965) has been a reporter for The New York Times since 1995, where she covers cultural institutions, the art world, architecture, and other subjects. \par
\par
S.R is a London-based journalist who writes about the art world - and sometimes the real world - for the New York Times. And The Art Newspaper.\par

\pard\sa200\sl240\slmult1\cf0\line\line How did a young graffiti rebel go from selling drawings for $50 in 1980 to having a painting come up for auction this week at a staggering $60 million?\par
[ Update: The painting sold for $110.5 million at auction ]\par
The answer to this remarkable trajectory of Jean-Michel Basquiat, who died at 27 of a drug overdose in 1988, lies in the art market\rquote s unpredictable but powerful alchemy: a combination of raw talent, compelling biography and limited supply.\par
\ldblquote And then, on top of that, the cool factor and the mythology,\rdblquote  said Franklin Sirmans, the director of the P\'e9rez Art Museum Miami, an expert on Basquiat. \ldblquote It\rquote s a great success story that also comes along with a lot of the tragedy people can relate to and what we look to see in our artists \f1\emdash  our Kurt Cobains and our Janis Joplins.\rdblquote\par
On Thursday night, Sotheby\rquote s will offer Basquiat\rquote s 1982 painting of a face in the shape of a skull, \ldblquote Untitled,\rdblquote  with a guaranteed price of at least $60 million, an auction high for the artist. And given the current international appetite for his work, that figure could go higher in a bidding war.\line Such eight-figure sums are a stunning jump in value for a piece that sold for just $19,000 in 1984 to two collectors of emerging artists, Jerry and Emily Spiegel. The work hasn\rquote t been on the market since.\par
High prices are hardly new for Basquiat, art experts note. Last year, he became the highest-grossing American artist at auction, generating $171.5 million from 80 works, according to the Artprice database. The auction high for Basquiat has increased at least tenfold in the last 15 years, soaring to $57.3 million in 2016 with Christie\rquote s spring sale of a 1982 \ldblquote Untitled\rdblquote  Basquiat owned by the New York collector Adam Lindemann, in which the artist depicts himself as a horned devil amid orange, red, white and black brush strokes.\par
\ldblquote As the market was accelerating, you had distinguished connoisseurs of modern art who had no hesitation about putting Basquiat beside Picasso,\rdblquote  said the dealer Jeffrey Deitch, who gave the eulogy at the artist\rquote s funeral. \ldblquote Already he was in a different league than almost any other contemporary artist.\rdblquote\par
The question is whether price levels will remain this high. Typically, people in the auction world say, a surge in prices prompts collectors to jump on the bandwagon, consigning their works by the same artist. Indeed, after Christie\rquote s success with its Basquiat last spring, it seemed as though everyone wanted in on the action.\line There are no fewer than 16 Basquiats on offer at Sotheby\rquote s, Christie\rquote s and Phillips\rquote s evening auctions this season, which together represent an estimated minimum value of about $119 million \emdash  out of a total of $690 million for the three sales. Basquiat is, both numerically and financially, the week\rquote s heavyweight artist.\line But most of the Basquiat works to come to auction in the near future are likely to be of lesser importance, auction experts say, which may or may not benefit from the latest Basquiat price. \ldblquote There will be a large number of people wanting to sell \emdash  and most of what they want to sell will be inferior,\rdblquote  said Brett Gorvy, Christie\rquote s former chairman and international head of postwar and contemporary art, who this year became a dealer. \ldblquote You can have a big high and then weaker paintings will pull down the market to a more sane level.\rdblquote\par
When it comes to the best of Basquiat, however \emdash  generally, works produced between 1981 and 1983 at the start of his short career (though there are also good later pieces) \emdash  the demand remains high. Collectors who own top Basquiats don\rquote t want to sell, and museums can\rquote t afford them, so few of his paintings are in major institutions.\par
\ldblquote It\rquote s a bit like the Warhol Marilyns,\rdblquote  Mr. Gorvy said. \ldblquote Something huge would have to happen for those to come to market.\rdblquote  And few other artists, he added, \ldblquote are creating that sort of buzz in the marketplace.\rdblquote\line Though Basquiat might be the darling of the market and have a grass-roots popularity, there has been a paucity of big retrospectives in major international museums like the Tate Modern in London or the Museum of Modern Art in New York. A large show, \ldblquote Basquiat: Boom for Real,\rdblquote  opening at the Barbican Center in London on Sept. 21, will be the first large-scale British exhibition of his work.\par
The $60 million painting at Sotheby\rquote s on Thursday, the most highly valued of New York\rquote s May auction season, has been consigned by Lise Spiegel Wilks, the daughter of Mr. Spiegel, a real estate developer and art collector of Kings Point, N.Y., and his wife Emily. The elder Spiegels both died in 2009, leaving their collection to their daughters, Ms. Wilks and Pamela Sanders. Ms. Sanders has consigned 107 works from her parents\rquote  collection at Christie\rquote s, for a guarantee of  more than $100 million, according to Bloomberg \emdash  but none of those works are at the value of her sister\rquote s inherited \ldblquote Untitled.\rdblquote\line\ldblquote It\rquote s a showstopper,\rdblquote  the Paris dealer Christian Ogier said of the painting. \ldblquote Basquiat is always good, but here he is at his strongest in color and edginess.\rdblquote\par
People are also drawn to Basquiat\rquote s personal story: a young black man in dreadlocks from Brooklyn who died just seven years into an exploding career.\par
Then, too, there was Mr. Basquiat\rquote s artistic talent and historical significance. \ldblquote He is one of the great artists of the second half of the 20th century,\rdblquote  said Dieter Buchhart, a curator based in Vienna and New York who has organized Basquiat exhibitions around the world. \ldblquote The way he worked with words, the line and how he soaked up all the information surrounding him.\rdblquote\par
The collectors Herb and Lenore Schorr were among Basquiat\rquote s earliest supporters. In 1981, they bought the artist\rquote s eight-foot-wide painting \ldblquote Poison Oasis\rdblquote  from the New York dealer Annina Nosei for $3,500. Just two years later, they purchased another painting for $10,000 at the Fun Gallery\rquote s one-man Basquiat show in New York.\par
\ldblquote He had the natural skills of drawing and painting, he used words, and he represented New York, which appealed to us,\rdblquote  Mrs. Schorr, 75, recalled. \ldblquote He was a very brilliant, charismatic young man.\rdblquote\line Artists\rquote  flames have died out in the past. The question is whether this one will continue to burn.\par
\ldblquote The dimensions of Basquiat are more apparent in the world today \emdash  his impact on music, lyrics, dress \emdash  even hair \emdash  is totally integrated and embedded in our culture,\rdblquote  said Larry Warsh, a longtime Basquiat collector. \ldblquote Jean-Michel is now connected to the greats of art history. So what do you pay for that?\rdblquote\line\line\i\f0\lang1040 captions:\line\par

\pard\sl-375\slmult0 img 1: \cf2\i0\f1\lang1033\ldblquote\f0 Untitled,\f1\rdblquote\f0  a Basquiat painting from 1982, sold for $110.5 million at Sotheby\f1\rquote\f0 s recently, setting an auction record for work by any American artist.\par
Credit...\par

\pard\sa200\sl240\slmult1\cf0\i\lang1040\fstretch0\line img 2: \cf2\i0\lang1033\fstretch5 Irony of a Negro Policeman Jean-Michel Basquiat, 1981 This painting by Basquiat was intended to show the control that white society has over African-Americans. The concept of 'Negro policeman' was found ironic to the artist. That black officers were used to enforce rules designed by 'white society.'\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\b 12 (contrasting with 11) SOUL\line Hi\'ebronymus Bosch \line\b0 by KATHLEEN KUIPER\line\cf0\fweight500 was Senior Editor, Arts & Culture, Encyclop\'e6dia Britannica until 2016. She also edited Merriam-Webster\f1\rquote\f0 s Encyclopedia of Literature.\cf2\fweight400\line\line\cf0\expndtw8 Hi\'ebronymus Bosch, also spelled Jheronimus Bos, pseudonym of Jeroen van Aeken, Aeken also spelled Aquen or Aken, also called Jeroen Anthoniszoon, (born c. 1450, \f1\rquote\f0 s-Hertogenbosch, Brabant [now in the Netherlands]\f1\emdash\f0 buried August 9, 1516, \par
\f1\rquote\f0 s-Hertogenbosch), brilliant and original northern European painter whose work reveals an unusual iconography of a complex and individual style. He was recognized as a highly imaginative \f1\ldblquote\f0 creator of devils\f1\rdblquote\f0  and a powerful inventor of seeming nonsense full of satirical and moralizing meaning.\par
\par
Works attributed to his youthful period show an awkwardness in drawing and composition and brushwork somewhat limited in its scope. Such paintings as The Cure of Folly, Crucifixion, The Adoration of the Magi, The Seven Deadly Sins, The Marriage at Cana, Ecce Homo, and The Conjurer are representative of that period. The presence of certain motifs, expanded in the more-sophisticated works of the artist\f1\rquote\f0 s middle period, and a limited technique, unsure yet bold, provide a beginning from which to view Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s artistic origins. Between the first painting in that early group, The Cure of Folly, and the last, The Conjurer, a steady development can be seen. The iconography of the latter is more complex, and the characteristic themes that received their fullest expression in the great masterpieces of his late period have begun to emerge.\par
\par
In those early paintings Bosch had begun to depict humanity\f1\rquote\f0 s vulnerability to the temptation of evil, the deceptive allure of sin, and the obsessive attraction of lust, heresy, and obscenity. In calm and prosaic settings, groups of people exemplify the credulity, ignorance, and absurdities of the human race. However, the imagery of the early works is still relatively conventional, with only an occasional intrusion of the bizarre in the form of a lurking demon or a strangely dressed magician.\par
\par
\expndtw3 To Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s fruitful middle period belong the great panoramic triptychs such as the Haywain, The Temptation of St. Anthony, and The Garden of Earthly Delights. His figures are graceful and his colours subtle and sure, and all is in motion in those ambitious and extremely complex works. The paintings are marked by an eruption of fantasy, expressed in monstrous apocalyptic scenes of chaos and nightmare that are contrasted and juxtaposed with idyllic portrayals of humankind in the age of innocence. During this period Bosch elaborated on his early ideas, and the few paintings that survive establish the evolution of his thought. Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s disconcerting mixture of fantasy and reality is further developed in the Haywain, the outside wings, or cover panels, of which recall the scenes of The Seven Deadly Sins. The cursive style that he worked out for the triptych resembles that of watercolour. In the central panel, a rendition of the Flemish proverb \f1\ldblquote\f0 The world is a haystack from which each takes what he can,\f1\rdblquote\f0  Bosch shows the trickery of the demon who guides the procession of people from the earthly paradise depicted on the left wing to the horrors of hell shown on the right one.\par
\expndtw8\par
Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s The Temptation of St. Anthony displays his ascent to stylistic maturity. The brushstrokes are sharper and terser, with much more command than before. The composition becomes more fluid, and space is regulated by the incidents and creatures that the viewer\f1\rquote\f0 s attention is focused on. His mastery of fine brush-point calligraphy, permitting subtle nuances of contour and movement, is fully evident. Bosch portrays the human struggle against temptation, as well as the omnipresence of the Devil, in his St. Anthony, one of the best keys to the artist\f1\rquote\f0 s personal iconography. The hermit saint in this work is cast as the heroic symbol of humankind. In the central panel St. Anthony is beset by an array of grotesque demons, their horrible bodies being brilliantly visualized amalgamations of human, animal, vegetable, and inanimate parts. In the background is a hellish, fantastically bizarre landscape painted with the most exquisite detail. Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s development of the theme of the charlatan deceiving humans and taking away their salvation receives its fullest exposition in St. Anthony, with its condemnation of heresy and the seductions of false doctrines.\par
\par
The Garden of Earthly Delights, representative of Bosch at his mature best, shows the earthly paradise with the creation of woman, the first temptation, and the Fall. The painting\f1\rquote\f0 s beautiful and unsettling images of sensuality and of the dreams that afflict the people who live in a pleasure-seeking world express Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s iconographic originality with tremendous force. The chief characteristic of this work is perhaps its dreamlike quality; multitudes of nude human figures, giant birds, and horses cavort and frolic in a delightfully implausible, otherworldly landscape, and all the elements come together to produce a perfect, harmonious whole.\par
\par
Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s late works are fundamentally different. The scale changes radically, and, instead of meadows or hellish landscapes inhabited by hundreds of tiny beings, he painted densely compacted groups of half-length figures pressed tight against the picture plane. In those dramatic close-ups, of which The Crowning with Thorns and Christ Carrying the Cross are representative, the event is portrayed so near that the spectator seems to participate in it physically as well as psychologically. The most peaceful and untroubled of Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s mature works depict various saints in contemplation or repose. Among those works are St. John the Evangelist on Patmos and St. Jerome in Prayer.\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl240\slmult1 Bosch\f1\rquote\f0 s preoccupation in much of his work with the evils of the world did not preclude his vision of a world full of beauty. His adeptness at handling colour harmonies and at creating deeply felt works of the imagination is readily apparent. Though a spate of imitators tried to appropriate his visual style, its uniqueness prevented his having any real followers.\expndtw0\i\lang1040\fstretch0\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1 captions:\line\line img 1: \i0\lang1033\fstretch5 The Garden of Earthly Delights is the modern title[a] given to a triptych oil painting on oak panel painted by the Early Netherlandish master Hieronymus Bosch, between 1490 and 1510, when Bosch was between 40 and 60 years old.[1] It has been housed in the Museo del Prado in Madrid since the year 1939. \par
As so little is known of Bosch's life or intentions, interpretations of his intent have ranged from an admonition of worldly fleshy indulgence, to a dire warning on the perils of life's temptations, to an evocation of ultimate sexual joy. The intricacy of its symbolism, particularly that of the central panel, has led to a wide range of scholarly interpretations over the centuries. Twentieth-century art historians are divided as to whether the triptych's central panel is a moral warning or a panorama of paradise lost. \par
\f1\lang1040\fstretch0\line\f0 img 2: \lang1033\fstretch5 Death and the Miser is a Hieronymus Bosch painting. It is currently in the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.[1] The painting is the inside of the right panel of a divided triptych. The other existing portions of the triptych are The Ship of Fools and Allegory of Gluttony and Lust, while The Wayfarer was painted on the external right panel. \par
Death and the Miser belongs to the tradition of the memento mori, works that remind the viewer of the inevitability of death. The painting shows the influence of popular 15th-century handbooks on the art of dying (Ars moriendi), intended to help Christians choose Christ over sinful pleasures.  \par
\f1\lang1040\fstretch0\line\f0 img 3: \lang1033\fstretch5 Christ In Limbo, about 1575\par
Oil on wood\par
22 7/8 \'d7 28 3/8 in\par
58.1 \'d7 72.1 cm\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f1\lang1040\fstretch0\par

\pard\b\f0 13 STATE\line\lang1033\fstretch5 Leni Riefenstahl\line\fweight500\b0 by \caps J\'fcrgen Trimborn  March 27 2017\line\caps0 (1971\f1\endash\f0 2012) was a German cultural \par
and cinematic scientist who mainly worked as a \par
freelance author. He authored book about film and \par
television as well as biographies about Leni \par
Riefenstahl, Arno Breker,\f1\~\f0 Johannes Heesters, \par
Hilde gard Knef,\f1\~\f0 Rudi Carrell,\f1\~\f0 Romy Schneider \par
and\f1\~\f0 Rainer WernerFassbinder.\par
\caps\line\par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\expndtw8\fweight400\caps0 When King Wilhelm I of Prussia was proclaimed German kaiser in 1871, Berlin became a center of political power. With its three million inhabitants, the metropolis on the Spree became an economic, civic, and, in particular, social and cultural hub. At the turn of the century, Berlin possessed an expressly international flair, even if restrictive Wilhelmian policies repeatedly checked modern developments and avant-garde movements. But this had little effect on the fascination that the city held. Visitors, both German and foreign, strolled along the elegant Unter den Linden, past spectacularly ostentatious architecture and tributes in stone to the Hohenzollern rulers. They visited the well-stocked department stores, the opulent opera houses, the magnificent revue palaces, and Max Reinhardt\f1\rquote\f0 s celebrated theaters, sampling the various worlds that Berlin nurtured in the Gr\'fcnderjahre, the years of expansion in the early 1870s when it basked in the light of its newfound importance. \par
\par
The policies established in the Berlin of the monarchy, the \f1\ldblquote\f0 fastest-moving city in the world,\f1\rdblquote\f0  were to set the course the German Reich was to follow in the years to come. Kaiser Wilhelm II, known for his comic opera costumes and his exaggerated rhetoric, came up with the catchphrase, embraced by the aristocracy as well as the bourgeoisie, that Germany, too, needed a \f1\ldblquote\f0 place in the sun.\f1\rdblquote\f0  The quest for colonies that followed, enthusiastically supported by a complacent Reichstag, was to find its premature end in the years of the First World War. \par
\par
In turn-of-the-century Berlin, the economy flourished. The city was in the grip of a near euphoric period of development, and a large number of ambitious enterprises were established during the building boom. And sharing in the general optimism was Alfred Theodor Paul Riefenstahl, trained as a master fitter. \par
\par
Born in Berlin on October 30, 1878, as the son of the journeyman locksmith Gustav Hermann Theodor Riefenstahl and his wife, Amalie, Alfred Riefenstahl grew up with two brothers and a sister. He abandoned the artisan milieu of his forefathers to become a salesman and make his way on his own. Shortly after receiving his master\f1\rquote\f0 s certificate, he took over a prosperous installation business, which he ran with a combination of practical knowledge and commercial farsightedness. His daughter Leni later portrayed him as a large and powerful man with blond hair and blue eyes. Contemporary photographs reveal a well-dressed figure mindful of his appearance, who commanded respect and appeared proud of the social standing he had achieved on his own. Alfred Riefenstahl had a strong character, and insisted on staying in control and exerting his authority. He was full of life, temperamental, and inclined to violent outbursts if anyone stood in his way, whether in business or private. He seldom tolerated argument. \par
\par
He married Bertha Ida Scherlach, born to German parents in Wl/o-cll/awek, Poland, on October 9, 1880. Her father, Karl Ludwig Ferdinand Scherlach, a carpenter from West Prussia (in Memoiren, Riefenstahl promoted him to an "architect"), had found work in neighboring Poland and settled there. Together, he and his East Prussian wife, Ottilie, had eighteen children. Ottilie died giving birth to their eighteenth child, Bertha, and the thirty-eight-year-old widower suddenly found himself alone with his offspring. Shortly after the death of his wife, he married a woman who had been a governess in the Scherlach household and who would bear him three more children in the years that followed. \par
\par
When Scherlach made the decision to move with his family to Berlin, he was too old to seek new employment. So it was the children, including Bertha, who supported the family. Bertha had completed her training as a seamstress and, as the youngest offspring of a large family well accustomed to working from a young age, quickly found a position in the country's capital. Even with her own earnings she was forced to lead a very modest life, as she had to support her out-of-work father and her young siblings. \par
\par
When the respectable businessman Alfred Riefenstahl entered her life, her rise in society was assured. But with her wedding she had to bury the secret dream of her youth of becoming an actress. Bertha Scherlach met Alfred Riefenstahl, two years her senior, at a costume ball in 1900. It was not a long courtship; the two quickly realized they would stay together-not least because Bertha soon was expecting her first child. The wedding took place in Berlin on April 5, 1902. \par
\par
The relationship between Alfred and Bertha Riefenstahl was a difficult one, but typical for the times. On one side was a husband who demanded total authority, and on the other a woman who was not only unprepared but also probably unable to challenge him. The rules of Wilhelmian society dictated that she subordinate herself to her husband's wishes, and the two adjusted to a petit-bourgeois life, in which the young family soon was firmly rooted. \par
\par
The birth of Bertha Helene Amalie Riefenstahl was recorded at the Berlin Registry Office XIII on August 22, 1902. As was customary at the time, the birth took place at home, in a simple, modest apartment on Prinz-Eugen-Strasse in the working-class quarter of Wedding. From infancy on, she was called "Leni." \par
\par
\par
Leni Riefenstahl led a protected childhood, free of material cares. The family slowly worked its way up from a petit-bourgeois milieu to the middle class. Alfred Riefenstahl quickly prospered in the heating and ventilation systems firm that he opened on Kurf\'fcrstenstrasse, but this prosperity was based more on luck than on business acumen. His business expanded owing to the installation contracts resulting from the city's countless new construction projects and the renovation of older buildings. These increased the family's earnings and guaranteed a certain standard of living. \par
\par
As he did from his wife, Alfred Riefenstahl expected discipline and absolute obedience from his daughter. He had been raised to rule his family with a firm hand and tolerate no disagreement, and he considered the example set by his father to be the ideal for his own family. He was as uncompromising at home as he was in business, routinely imposing his own habits on his wife and his child, which led to constant conflict. Riefenstahl flew into a rage at the least disturbance of his daily routine and could "stamp like an elephant if the button on his starched collar proved hard to undo." \par
\par
Leni secretly wished for a gentle, loving father, but when she attempted to break away from his cold and severe control, rebelling against her predetermined role as the obedient daughter, he reacted with outbursts of rage. Nor did he shrink from beating and humiliating his daughter and locking her in the house for the slightest infraction, or from punishing her with a silence that would last for weeks. "Once, when I was caught [stealing apples] and my father found out about it, he gave me a terrible whipping and locked me in a dark room for an entire day. And I suffered his sternness on other occasions as well." The girl suffered from her father's coldness and spent her whole childhood trying to wrest from him some proof of his love, but again and again she encountered only harsh rejection or emotional distance. \par
\par
And yet her father quickly registered that Leni had inherited his own stubbornness and, as she grew older, was prepared to battle her father's authority. More and more often she made decisions without first asking her father's permission, which she tried to keep secret. For example, she kept from him the fact that she had registered at a gymnastics club and, later, at dancing school. The volatile relationship between father and daughter was always threatening to explode, and the most innocuous event could turn into a contest of wills: "It was often difficult to get along with him. He liked to play chess with me-but I always had to let him win. Once, when I beat him, he became so mad that he forbade me to go to a costume party I was so looking forward to." \par
\par
As mother and wife, Bertha Riefenstahl often found herself caught between two fronts in the arguments between her daughter and her husband. Though emotionally she usually sided with her daughter, she dared not go against her husband. As a rule, she tried to mediate between them, at the risk of finding herself trapped in the minefield of family quarrels as soon as she took one side or the other. \par
\par
Nor did the birth in 1905 of a second child, named Heinz-the son Alfred Riefenstahl had so wished for-improve the atmosphere at home. Things relaxed only when the father was out of the house on business or enjoying himself with his friends. \f1\ldblquote\f0 Luckily, my father often went hunting, and only when he was gone could we all finally feel free at home.\f1\rdblquote\f0  \par
\par
Leni, Heinz, and their mother established something resembling a secret society. When Riefenstahl was away, they all were happy to go about their activities without reservation, activities he didn\f1\rquote\f0 t approve of or simply forbade. Leni quickly developed a very affectionate relationship with her brother, who was three years younger. For the whole of her life she felt closely connected to him, though with his essentially reticent and shy personality he was totally different from his quick-witted and audacious sister. \par
\par
From the outside, the Riefenstahls epitomized a happy family. No one was privy to the tensions that went on behind the scenes in an effort to appear a promising young middle-class family. A photo from the period shows the two children in their Sunday sailor suits, a symbol at the time not only of pride in the kaiser\f1\rquote\f0 s navy but also of belonging to \f1\ldblquote\f0 better society.\f1\rdblquote\f0  \par
Alfred Riefenstahl\f1\rquote\f0 s flourishing businesses required that the family demonstrate a certain standard of living. Leni Riefenstahl\f1\rquote\f0 s childhood, therefore, was marked by frequent moves and changes of neighborhood, which always called for her to adapt to a new location. The family first moved from Wedding to Hermannplatz in Berlin- Neuk\'88lln, then to Yorckstrasse in Sch\'88neberg and on to Wilmersdorf before temporarily settling southeast of the city, in 1921, in Rauchfangswerder in the Brandenburg March. \par
\par
\f1\ldblquote\f0 In My Youth I Was a Happy Person\f1\rdblquote\f0  \par
Even before moving to Rauchfangswerder, located on a peninsula of the Zeuthener See, the outdoors played an important role in the Riefenstahl family\f1\rquote\f0 s life. In portraying her childhood, Leni Riefenstahl always stressed how important nature was to her. The well- to-do family soon bought a small weekend house in a little village that Riefenstahl calls Petz and which presumably is the town of P\'89tz, located on the P\'89tzer Vordersee near the small Brandenburg city of Bestensee. Fleeing the hectic pace of big-city life, the Riefenstahls spent nearly every weekend here, an hour by train from Berlin. Leni Riefenstahl, by her own account, grew into a true \f1\ldblquote\f0 child of nature, beneath trees and bushes, with plants and insects, watched over and protected.\f1\rdblquote\f0  Being outdoors in nature was essential to her. \par
\par
The girl who became accustomed to life in the country from an early age welcomed the family\f1\rquote\f0 s later move to Rauchfangswerder, even though the daily hour-and-a-half trip to Berlin was time-consuming and exhausting. The idyllic country surroundings appeared more important to her than the comforts of the city. The Riefenstahls\f1\rquote\f0  property included a large overgrown meadow that ran down to a lake bordered by old weeping willows, the branches of which dipped into the water. The family owned a rowboat and also made outings to the nearby forest and meadows. Their not always simple family life became noticeably more relaxed in this bucolic setting, and, far from his business concerns and the noise of the metropolis, even Alfred Riefenstahl, with his weekday moods and his tendency to angry outbursts, became calmer here. He would lie for hours on the shore of the lake or work in the small garden where the family grew fruits and vegetables for their table. \par
\par
Leni Riefenstahl tried her whole life to recapture the idyllic experience of nature that she had known as a child. Being outdoors in harmony with nature provided an important and incomparable source of strength. Particularly important to the young girl was the privacy and time for herself she found there. She played with the neighborhood children, of course, climbing trees and organizing foot- and swimming races: \f1\ldblquote\f0 Nothing was too high for me or too steep or too dangerous.\f1\rdblquote\f0  But, at least as she presented it in retrospect, she continually withdrew to spend whole hours and days in her own dreamworld. Even in early childhood she needed to withdraw from her playmates as well as from her family from time to time, often to the little wooden hut that her father built for her as a refuge amid the huge sunflowers in the garden. There she could get away from the world and enjoy the leisure time that her parents uncritically granted her: \f1\ldblquote\f0 It was here that I could dream.\f1\rdblquote\f0  \par
\par
Riefenstahl\f1\rquote\f0 s harmonious transfiguration of her past runs like a thread through all of her versions of her life. Despite the considerable burdens imposed by her hot- tempered, authoritarian father, and though she was a child and youth during the First World War and the revolutionary unrest in Berlin that followed, Riefenstahl\f1\rquote\f0 s descriptions of this time culminate in a portrait of an Eden removed from the historical moment. No passages in Memoiren address material want or the existential fears that were endemic, or one single confrontation with political events. Instead, there is the simple declaration, \f1\ldblquote\f0 In my youth I was a happy person.\f1\rdblquote\f0  \par
\par
In 1908, Leni Riefenstahl was enrolled in school in Berlin-Neuk\'88lln. She impressed her teachers as an inquisitive and alert young girl who was very mature for her age. At school she could at least partially satisfy her wide-ranging thirst for knowledge. But her spontaneity and vitality did not always conform to the strict Prussian school system, which insisted on discipline and order. As a student she often was at odds with the curriculum, interrupting her teachers with countless pointed questions that went far beyond the teaching materials and earned her many a bad grade in deportment. \par
\par
While in school she forged a characteristic that marked her entire life: when something captured her interest, she was not satisfied until she had completely sated her quest for knowledge about the subject. Following elementary school, she attended the Kollmorgen Lyceum, a girls\f1\rquote\f0  school from which she successfully graduated. In her favorite subjects, including gymnastics, drawing, and math, she was said to be at the top of her class. \par
\par
The Germany she had been born into was changing dramatically. In 1914, when she had just turned twelve, the First World War broke out in Europe, the end of which would mark the fall of the German monarchy, followed by a period of political upheaval and the declaration of the Weimar Republic. Soldiers marched out of Berlin to war with smiles on their faces, fully convinced they would be victorious. Political discussion among all levels of society in the German empire heated up; countless patriotic pamphlets were published on the war, and even the country\f1\rquote\f0 s pulpits generated militant and chauvinistic slogans. \par
\par
The war was soon to have an enormous effect on everyday life. By 1916, the blockade enforced by the Allies had led to serious food shortages and rationing. Many people went hungry. In the final two winters of the war, schools were no longer heated. And 1917 brought frequent strikes by Berlin\f1\rquote\f0 s workers, which affected everyone\f1\rquote\f0 s lives. \par
\par
The war ended in 1918 in a capitulation that Germans perceived as a humiliating national defeat. The kaiser abdicated and Germany became known as the Weimar Republic. During this period, a bloody civil war was waged in the streets of Berlin; constant protest marches by workers were met with the brutal countermeasures of the government of Friedrich Ebert. \par
\par
The revolution shook the foundations of German society. The streets and squares of Berlin were filled with huge numbers of uprooted men and women, and the conditions of unrest, palpable everywhere, contributed to people\f1\rquote\f0 s uncertainty. There were many who exploited this extreme disorientation, aggravating the political discontent. The notion that German troops had been \f1\ldblquote\f0 stabbed in the back,\f1\rdblquote\f0  allegedly undefeated in the field but victims of \f1\ldblquote\f0 betrayal on the home front,\f1\rdblquote\f0  found an ever greater audience. Inflation, which pushed many Germans of the lower classes to the brink of starvation, increased political instability in the young republic...\expndtw0\fweight500\caps\par

\pard  \par

\pard\sl240\slmult1\fweight400\caps0\f1\lang1040\fstretch0\line\i\f0 captions\line img 1: \i0\lang1033\fstretch5 Photography from: Triumph of the Will (German: Triumph des Willens) is a 1935 Nazi propaganda film directed, produced, edited, and co-written by Leni Riefenstahl. It chronicles the 1934 Nazi Party Congress in Nuremberg, which was attended by more than 700,000 Nazi supporters.\par
\i\lang1040\fstretch0\line img 2: \i0\lang1033\fstretch5 Leni Riefenstahl shooting the film The Victory of Faith.\par
Der Sieg des Glaubens (English: The Victory of Faith) (1933) is the first propaganda film directed by Leni Riefenstahl. Her film recounts the Fifth Party Rally of the Nazi Party, which occurred in Nuremberg from 30 August to 3 September 1933.[1] The film is of great historic interest because it shows Adolf Hitler and Ernst R\'f6hm on close and intimate terms, before R\'f6hm was shot on the orders of Hitler during the Night of the Long Knives on 1 July 1934. All known copies of the film were destroyed on Hitler's orders, and it was considered lost until a copy turned up in the 1980s in Germany.\line\f2\fs27\line\b\f0\fs22\lang1040 14 (contrasting with 13)\line STATE\line Art in Review; Danny Lyon\line\b0 by GRACE GLUECK   April 14 2016\line\cf2\lang1033 was an arts reporter, critic, and art news editor for The New York Times  from the 1960s until the early 2010s.She graduated from New York University Glueck is the co-author, with Paul Gardner, of Brooklyn: People and Places, Past and Present (1991)and New York: The Painted City (1992).She has also written for The New Criterion and the Los Angeles Review of Books.\line\cf0\lang1040\line\cf2\expndtw8\lang1033 Biking looms large in the photographs of Danny Lyon a photo-documentarian, writer and filmmaker whose close-up-and personal shots of his fellow motorcyclists were the basis of a well-known insidery book, \f1\ldblquote\f0 The Bikeriders,\f1\rdblquote\f0  in 1968.\par
\par
His work has always engaged the grittier aspects of American life, starting in the early 1960\f1\rquote\f0 s, when he followed the civil rights movement with his camera for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.\par
This rambling \f1\ldblquote\f0 re-examination\f1\rdblquote\f0  of his career presents previously unpublished outtakes from some of his projects including, besides \f1\ldblquote\f0 The Bikeriders,\f1\rdblquote\f0  a documentation of what he saw as Lower Manhattan\f1\rquote\f0 s destructive urban renewal, and an account of prisons and prisoners in Texas. The wide-ranging mix of nearly 60 vintage prints, virtually all from the 1960\f1\rquote\f0 s and some never seen before, also includes images of country people, youthful car cultists, pool players and transvestites as well as modest, low-key snapshots from his own family life and a self-portrait or two. The show starts with a glimpse of Mr. Lyon\f1\rquote\f0 s face in a rear-view mirror that is artfully twisted to a vertical position before a rainy windshield. It ends with a close-up of a pin-up image mounted on a shiny hubcap. The macho attraction to wheels and engines is saluted in other shots, like \f1\ldblquote\f0 Andrew Sanchez, Llanito\f1\rdblquote\f0  (1975), depicting a grease-stained tinkerer intensely involved with his auto\f1\rquote\f0 s innards, and \f1\ldblquote\f0 Knoxville\f1\rdblquote\f0  (1967), showing four high-testosterone youths congregated in and around a vintage convertible.\par
\par
There are poignant images of African-American life, ranging from a pair of transvestites, Roberta and Pumpkin, to a lone young girl laboring in a field in Tallahatchie County, Miss. Also in Mississippi, a close-up of hard-bitten carnival people at a county fair, and a view of ghostly abandoned farm buildings in a field of weeds project a less-than-upbeat vision of rural America.\par
\par
A spate of prison pictures from Texas shows men behind bars, at hard labor picking and transporting cotton and \f1\ldblquote\f0 relaxing\f1\rdblquote\f0  under close supervision by guards. From a documentary point of view, perhaps, they are important, but they are the least interesting of the strong images in this engrossing miscellany.\par
\par
\i captions:\line\par
img 1: \expndtw0\i0 The Dominoes Players, Walls Unit, TDC, 1967, Gelatin silver enlargement print\par
11 \'d7 14 in (27.9 \'d7 35.6 cm).\par
\cf0\lang1040\par
img 2: \cf2\lang1033 Danny Lyon, Arrest of Taylor Washington, Atlanta, 1963, Vintage gelatin silver print. Collection of the artist. (C) Danny Lyon, courtesy Edwynn Houk Gallery, New York\line\par
img 3: memories of the-southern civil rights movement (1024x689)\par
\par
img 4: Police in Clarksdale Mississippi, 1963\par
\par
img 5: Superjumbo, Protest againt the police\par
\par
\b 15 BODY\line {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/yayoi-kusama-8094/kusama-and-anti-war-activism }}{\fldrslt{https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/yayoi-kusama-8094/kusama-and-anti-war-activism\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  \par
Kusama and anti-war activism \line\b0 by ANONIMOUS \line\par
Yayoi Kusama has always had a strong political conscience, and has been vehemently opposed to war since her teens.\par
Some of her earliest surviving paintings relate to the horrors of war: Accumulation of the Corpses (Prisoner Surrounded by the Curtain of Depersonalization) and Earth of Accumulation, both dating from 1950, show bleak, war-torn landscapes where even plant life struggles to survive.\par
In the 1960s, at the height of the Vietnam War, Kusama staged actions in New York, counteracting violence with activism in the form of naked body painting happenings and orgiastic love-ins. Her first Anatomic Explosion featuring naked dancers took place on 15 October 1968 opposite the New York Stock Exchange, and was prefaced by a press release that stated, \lquote The money made with this stock is enabling the war to continue. We protest this cruel, greedy instrument of the war establishment.\rquote\line Later that year Kusama produced An Open Letter to My Hero, Richard M. Nixon in which she wrote \lquote Our earth is like one little polka dot, among millions of other celestial bodies, one orb full of hatred and strife amid the peaceful, silent spheres. Let\rquote s you and I change all that and make this world a new Garden of Eden\'85. You can\rquote t eradicate violence by using more violence.\rquote\par
Later, on her return to Japan, Kusama made a series of devastating collages indicting war. War, Tidal Waves of War and Graves of the Unknown Soldiers feature harrowing images of from news magazines overlaid with watercolour and pastel. In 1995 Kusama responded to a commission from the Hiroshima City Museum of Contemporary Art to produce a new work commemorating the victims of the atomic bomb. She responded with the large-scale triptych Revived Soul. Unusually for the artist\rquote s work of the period, the painting is drained of colour, featuring abstracted waving vertical bands of black and white that suggest a forest of desiccated trees, all covered in her signature polka dots.\par
\par
\i captions :\line\par
img 1: \i0 Yayoi Kusama Accumulation of the Corpses (Prisoner Surrounded by the Curtain of Depersonalization) 1950\line\line img 2: Yayoi Kusama Anatomic Explosion on Wall Street 1968\line\line img 3: Yayoi Kusama Revived Soul 1995\par
\par
img 4: The artist at 'Kusama's Peep Show' exhibition, Castellane Gallery, New York, 1966 / Image courtesy: Ota Fine Arts, Tokyo \line\line img 5: Kusama's happening at the Statue of Liberty, Liberty Island, New York, 1968 / Image courtesy: Ota Fine Arts, Tokyo \par
\par
\b 16 (contrasting with 15)\line BODY\par
Elizabeth Catlett a Sculptor With Eye on Social Issues\line\b0 By Karen Rosenberg Apr 2 2012\par
\cf0\lang1040 Biography not found\line\par
\lang1033 Elizabeth Catlett, whose abstracted sculptures of the human form reflected her deep concern with the African-American experience and the struggle for civil rights, died on Monday at her home in Cuernavaca, Mexico, where she had lived since the late 1940s. She was 96.\par
June Kelly, one of her American dealers, said Ms. Catlett died in her sleep.\par
In her smoothly modeled clay, wood and stone sculptures, and vigorous woodcuts and linocuts, Ms. Catlett drew on her experience as an African-American woman who had come of age at a time of widespread segregation and who had felt its sting. But her art had other influences, including pre-Columbian sculpture, Henry Moore\f1\rquote\f0 s sensuous reclining nudes and Diego Rivera\f1\rquote\f0 s political murals. \par
Her best-known works depict black women as strong, maternal figures. In one early sculpture, \f1\ldblquote\f0 Mother and Child\f1\rdblquote\f0  (1939), a young woman with close-cropped hair and features resembling a Gabon mask cradles a child against her shoulder. It won first prize in sculpture at the American Negro Exposition in Chicago. In a recent piece, \f1\ldblquote\f0 Bather\f1\rdblquote\f0  (2009), a similar-looking subject flexes her triceps in a gesture of vitality and confidence. \par
Her art did not exclude men; \f1\ldblquote\f0 Invisible Man,\f1\rdblquote\f0  her 15-foot-high bronze memorial to the author Ralph Ellison, can be seen in Riverside Park in Manhattan, at 150th Street. \par
\par
Her art was often presented in the United States, in major surveys in the 1960s and \f1\rquote\f0 70s in particular, among them \f1\ldblquote\f0 Two Centuries of Black American Art,\f1\rdblquote\f0  at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art in 1976. Her posters of Harriet Tubman, Angela Davis, Malcolm X and other figures were widely distributed.\par
Alice Elizabeth Catlett was born on April 15, 1915, in Washington, the youngest of three children. Her mother, the former Mary Carson, was a truant officer; her father, John, who died before she was born, had taught at Tuskegee University and in the local public school system. \par
Ms. Catlett became an educator, too. After graduating cum laude from Howard University in 1935, she taught high school in Durham, N.C. \par
Howard hadn\rquote t been her first choice. She had won a scholarship to the Carnegie Institute of Technology, in Pittsburgh, but the college refused to allow her to matriculate when it learned she was black. So she entered historically black Howard, with one semester\rquote s worth of tuition saved by her mother. She earned scholarships to cover the rest. \par
\par
An interest in the painter Grant Wood led her to pursue an M.F.A. at the University of Iowa, where Wood was teaching. There she focused on stone carvings rooted in her own experience \f1\emdash  sensitive portraits of African-American women and children.\par
After graduating she moved to New Orleans to teach at Dillard University, another historically black institution. There she organized a trip to the Delgado Museum of Art so that her students could see a Picasso exhibition. But this was no ordinary school trip; the museum was officially off-limits to blacks, so Ms. Catlett arranged to visit on a day when it was closed to the public.\par
While on a summer break from Dillard, she met the artist Charles White in Chicago. They married in 1941 and divorced five years later. \line She left New Orleans to study with the Russian-born sculptor Ossip Zadkine in New York. Mr. Zadkine, who spent his formative years in Montparnasse alongside Modigliani and Brancusi, nudged her work in a more abstract direction. During this time, the early 1940s, Ms. Catlett also worked in adult education at the George Washington Carver School in Harlem, a program that nurtured the photographer Roy DeCarava, among others.\par
In 1946 Ms. Catlett traveled to Mexico on a fellowship. There she married the artist Francisco Mora and accepted an invitation to work at Taller de Gr\f0\'e1fica Popular (TGP), a workshop in Mexico City for murals and graphic arts. The TGP inspired her to reach out to the broadest possible audience, which often meant balancing abstraction with figuration.\par
\par
\ldblquote I learned how you use your art for the service of people, struggling people, to whom only realism is meaningful,\rdblquote  she later said of this period.\par
Like other artists and activists, Ms. Catlett felt the political tensions of the McCarthy years. The TGP was thought to have ties to the Communist Party; Ms. Catlett never joined the party, but Mr. White, her first husband, had been a member, and she was closely watched by the United States Embassy. \par
In 1949 she was arrested, along with other expatriates, during a railroad workers\rquote  strike in Mexico City. Eventually she gave up her American citizenship and was declared an undesirable alien by the State Department. In 1971 she had to obtain a special visa to attend the opening of her one-woman show at the Studio Museum in Harlem. \par
Ms. Catlett continued to teach even after becoming a successful ar\line tist. In 1958 she became the first female professor of sculpture and head of the sculpture department at the National Autonomous University of Mexico\rquote s School of Fine Arts in Mexico City. She retired to Cuernavaca, about 35 miles southwest of Mexico City, in 1975. \line Ms. Catlett\rquote s art is in museums around the world, including the Museum of Modern Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York; the High Museum in Atlanta; the Museum of Modern Art in Mexico City; and the National Museum of Prague. In 2003, the International Sculpture Center gave her a lifetime achievement award.\par
\par
\par
Mr. Mora, her husband, died in 2002. She is survived by three sons, Francisco, Juan and David Mora Catlett, 10 grandchildren and six great-grandchildren. \par
In 1998, the Neuberger Museum of Art at Purchase College in Westchester County exhibited a 50-year retrospective of Ms. Catlett\rquote s sculpture. The critic Michael Brenson wrote in the show\rquote s catalog, \ldblquote Ms. Catlett\rquote s sculptures communicate a deeply human image of African-Americans while appealing to values and virtues that encourage a sense of common humanity.\rdblquote  He also singled out the \ldblquote fluid, sensual surfaces\rdblquote  of her sculptures, which he said \ldblquote seem to welcome not just the embrace of light but also the caress of the viewer\rquote s hand.\rdblquote\par
In his review of that show for The New York Times, Ken Johnson wrote that Ms. Catlett \ldblquote gives wood and stone a melting, almost erotic luminosity.\rdblquote  But he also found her iconography \ldblquote generic and clich\'e9d.\rdblquote\par
Last year, the Bronx Museum mounted \ldblquote Stargazers: Elizabeth Catlett in Conversation With 21 Contemporary Artists,\rdblquote  an exhibition that placed her sculptures, prints and drawings in the company of works by Ellen Gallagher, Kalup Linzy, Wangechi Mutu and others at the forefront of the contemporary art scene.\par
In her own words, Ms. Catlett was more concerned with the social dimension of her art than its novelty or originality. As she told a former student, the artist and art historian Samella S. Lewis, \ldblquote I have always wanted my art to service my people \f1\emdash  to reflect us, to relate to us, to stimulate us, to make us aware of our potential.\rdblquote\line\line\i\f0\lang1040 captions:\par
\par
img 1: Elizabeth Catlett in 2011. Credit Adriana Zehbrauskas\par
\par
img 2: Ms. Catlett\rquote s \ldblquote Homage to Black Women Poets.\rdblquote\line\line img 3: A linoleum cut by Ms. Catlett. Her influences included pre-Columbian sculpture, Henry Moore\rquote s nudes and Diego Rivera\rquote s murals\line\par
img 4: Catlett was a Pioneering african woman artist in America \i0\lang1033\par

\pard\sl-570\slmult0\i\lang1040\fstretch0\par
}
 